Or you can, uh, give us the 1 0 1 version, uh, verbally,
uh, of your large submission.
So go for it. We're in your hands,
So we're ready to go. Okay. Yeah.
Yeah. It's 1231.
Thank you very much. Yeah. Uh, I'm Paul Dugan.
Thank you for the opportunities to talk
to you about this important topic of government planning.
It's a bit arcane, but for those of us who are into it,
it's, it's really fascinating.
Thanks for the report that
was prepared for the select committee.
I thought it dealt in detail with it. Thank you.
Um, I've had a lot of experience, uh,
in government planning, and I won't go into it now,
but I was the director of Labor Parliamentary Research Unit
and did multiple projects for treasury
and others in regard to planning, uh,
planning methodologies, particularly for government.
There's three takeaways that I, I wanna leave with you.
One is the need for conceptual clarity
around the key issues in government planning.
Secondly, there should be a better way
to see what government is doing.
And then lastly, we could build on New Zealand's reputation
as, uh, innovator in public sector planning in the,
in the eighties and the nineties by, uh,
moving forward in a, in a direction.
I'm about to suggest, first of all,
this question of conceptual clarity.
Um, a a lot of problems arose when I've been doing this work
for 30 years, and a lot of problems arose,
technical problems, for instance, the question
of attribution and accountability is a problem
that arises all the time.
Particularly if you start talking about outcomes.
You talk about contracting for outcomes,
it's essential that you get these, right?
Otherwise, people will end up carrying risks
that they don't even understand they're carrying.
So what I've done is I've written a book about this,
which is freely available up on the website
to be planning org slash book,
and it covers off all of the key issues that arose
and how to solve them from a robust conceptual point
of view using this thing called outcomes theory
that I've been developing in the course of this work.
So the first point is there is, uh,
is a little bit like if we're doing accounting.
You need accounting theory.
If you're doing outcomes work, planning work, you need, um,
a little bit of outcomes theory.
So there's a conceptual underpinning, which is available
for people to use up there.
Second point, the government planning is complex.
The documentation you are dealing with is complex,
and it will always be complex,
but we can put a visual layer over the top,
which enables people
to more excessively access the documentation.
And that's what I want to talk about.
I want to show you an example of visual
planning framework and action.
So what I've done here, this is kind of the fruition
of 30 years of work on government planning, is,
is I've specialized in building visual models.
I'm a psychologist, so I'm trying
to make things accessible for people.
And I've built a visual model here.
These are all the major
government departments, not all of them.
And we can drill down into them.
First of all, I've taken the government targets
and I've taken each of the government targets,
and here they are here.
Um, and what I've done for each, I've taken the target,
but I've also built one of these diagrams,
which is a particular type of intervention logic built
according to a certain set of rules.
And this is the steps that you'd have
to take in regard to that.
One of the, the targets, this target happens to be sure
to stays in emergency room.
So you need to talk about community care, care at home,
alternative scaled ambulance, handovers, et cetera.
So you can see what we see.
You can imagine a minister here talking to officials saying,
how are we going in regard to these boxes?
Are we going to achieve the target?
So the takeaway here is that you can use a visual approach
to thinking about planning.
Now, this just doesn't all, we've got all those, uh,
we've got all of the targets modeled in that way,
but we can also use it for government agencies.
So what I've done is I've built,
and all of these is fully populated.
I've built these models for all of the government.
I've done this in practice
with government agencies on hundreds of occasions.
But now what I've done with using an AI prompt
where I'm able to build very consistent models based on
public documentation from the government agencies.
So say someone says, well, hey, what's,
what's doc doing in regard to visitor
and recreation management?
Immediately, people on your committee ministers,
cabinet ministers, uh, mps, anyone can immediately say, Hey,
this is what, this is what doc's doing.
It's trying to look at visitor demand, uh,
site carrying capabilities, tracks, huts, camp sites.
So while we've got, there's a visual model,
like a little roadmap going from left to right, um,
which you can drill down immediately.
So you can see how this is much more
accessible than a traditional government
planning that we have.
It doesn't replace it, but it sits on top of it.
You could go, you could say,
what exactly is MFA doing in the Pacific, for instance?
So we drill down under MFA
and we can look at what it's doing in Pacific.
So it's, here's the steps.
Again, a model which has been drawn from public
documentation about what their department's doing.
It's not endorsed by the department,
but it could be, it could be amended
and it could be endorsed by the department.
So I just wanted to basically show you
that that's freely available.
It's up on the web for anyone to look at.
The committee can look at it, uh, et cetera.
And then the last point I wanna make is really about
innovation and government planning.
New Zealand led the world in the eighties
and nineties in government planning.
It could, if it wished to do it again with piloting this,
this, this approach that I'm putting forward.
Obviously cover that off in, in my, um,
submission and detail.
But I've just really given you a little taste of there, of
how you, we could, I, I have built in a sort of a proof
of concept of that we could have a visual model for
enabling people to get into government planning
a much more accessible way.
Now, what I've built there, that's, it is fully populated,
it's drawn off information,
public information about departments,
but there's no reason why the departments couldn't go
through and amend that to really absolutely tailor it
to exactly what they're doing.
It's all in PowerPoint.
Um, it's not any specialized software.
And that's just in conclusion, this DV planning approach.
Is it, it is in a sense, I'm giving it away.
I'm happy for anyone to use the approach.
Anyone can consult on it. Anyone can train people in it.
Um, it, it can be used is in all of that I showed you.
So anyone can edit it. People just need to acknowledge
that they're doing, do view planning.
So in conclusion, all
of this material's up on do view planning.org.
If you wanna look at the book, it's slash
book, if you wanna look at that.
Do view that I've showed you that diagram of, uh,
visualization of the, of the government planning.
It's up there slash nz do view.
And that's all I really wanted to say. Yeah.
Oh, brilliant, Paul. And, uh, great
to have an outcome specialist, uh, kicking off our, uh,
our first hearings on the inquiry into performance reporting
and, um, public accountability.
Do I have any questions members for Paul?
Uh, and that what we've, a lot of what we've seen is on
that website, uh, Ryan Hamilton. Thanks,
Chair. Uh, look, just,
just a comment, really.
Um, I hope that by the end of the process, we can end up
with something as straightforward as that
because, um, that's certainly, that's certainly, um,
you know, in my layman's process of working
through government departments, I think if anyone could,
could follow the pathway, um, yeah,
that would be most helpful.
So thank you for your contribution to, to today.
Yep. You've certainly made traceability, um, very easy in,
in, in those, uh, schemes that you showed us.
Anyone else? Okay, we'll, we'll leave it at that.
Paul, thank you so much for all the work you've done.
Keep in touch with the committee,
because this will be ongoing into next year, our inquiry.
And, um, we appreciate the work you've done.
And, uh, keep, keep in touch with our officials,
particularly around the office
of the auditor, general, and others.
Thanks very much. Um, so yeah, anyone can use that.
So have, have a wee look into that model.
It's, it's just up on the website at slash uh, nz do view,
and you can click through and see what you think
of it. Thank, thank you very
Much. Thank you. And it's an open,
open invitation
for supplementary advice
or information via our clerk's office as well
as we go through this process.
Thank you very much. Okay. Thank, thank you, Paul.
Bye-bye. Okay. Have we got their next submitters?
Yes, we've got Julie here, and we've got Peter here.
They're back. They are back.
And we appreciate your other submission.
So, um, uh, you've got five minutes.
Um, as independent economists, we look, uh,
we've got your submission here.
We look forward to your oral.
Okay, thanks. Thanks, chairman. Yes. Great to be back.
Um, we'll take it that you've read our submission.
So just, just, uh, summarize a few key points at the start,
and then hopeful have some time for questions.
We've focused our submission using the co the case study
of the work we've done on persistent disadvantage,
which is a, an area where governments have, have struggled
for quite some time across all, all, all governments
to improve lives.
And the accountability system isn't really helping, uh,
to, to do that.
And in fact, we suggest it's probably getting in the way.
And the areas we particularly want to, uh, focus on today
is that when you are dealing with people
with complex needs across multiple depart, working across
multiple departments, no single agency has,
has responsibility for, for everything.
And so accountability just, just doesn't help.
And the, particularly when you are trying to,
um, bring in the work of NGOs and iwis
and community groups, that,
that the current system just doesn't deal well across
that boundary.
We also think that, that the classic Westminster chain
of an accountability system,
which goes up from public servants to chief executives,
to ministers, to cabinet to parliament, uh,
has important gaps in it when you're dealing with, um,
with persistent disadvantage,
but also in other areas of policy.
It doesn't include the people
who are being helped in that chain.
It doesn't help communities.
It doesn't include to treaty,
and it also doesn't include future generations.
And so there, there are significant gaps of people
to whom officials should be accountable in their work and,
and that's not there.
And then finally, in areas where the government is using
contracting and third party, uh, providers
to provide services, the accountability system is often,
it's very departmental centered,
and it's pushing the author, the requirements
of departments onto providers.
Uh, it requires them to do a lot of work
for very little effort.
And we think there are real opportunities to increase,
to use the accountability systems
that those organizations are already subject to.
For example, if they're a charity,
they're subject to the Charities Act.
They do a lot of reporting.
You don't have to duplicate that in, uh, in contracts.
So that's the summary,
and we, we'd love to take any questions.
Okay. Thank you, Peter. And thank you, Julie.
Any questions, uh, for these two members? Okay.
Well, you've obviously made yourself, um, loud and clear,
and so thank you for, um, uh, giving us much, uh, a big part
of your day today on both submissions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks members. Thank
You. Thank you.
Okay.
Um, who have we got next? Mr.
Mr. Clark and James and Wayne?
Oh, very good. Hello, gentlemen.
Kia Kiara, uh, you have got 10 minutes,
and so we're not gonna eat into that.
We've got your written submission,
and so we're in your hands.
Yeah, K Cameron. And, um,
so we appreciate the opportunity to talk to the submission
that we, that we made.
My name is Dwayne Grace. I'm the, uh,
program director for Engage Global.
And beside me is, uh, James Barnes,
who's the director of the same company.
So, to, to kick it off, we, uh, reviewed the interim report
and that, that had one singular question.
How is it that parliament
and public hold the executive to account,
whether it be public money or otherwise?
And in the first kind of four key areas to that report,
we agreed in some, so whether it be the identification
of the limitations of, of the current reporting
or performance, uh, reporting system, that being
that performance data is, is fragmented.
There's no connect between, uh, policy, intent and outcome.
There's not a depth necessarily of the assessment,
and there's no cross-agency reporting mechanism
that lands exactly as to our experience.
And both James and I have experienced across 30 years
working across and in government on,
on different programs of works.
The second part to that is that the purpose of the system
that was defined was very good.
The accountability requirement for the system,
the improvement and the trust in terms of underpinning what
that performance reporting system would look like,
makes a lot of sense in the heartening thing from our
perspective or engages perspective, was that that component
around constant improvement of system when it comes
to then the design principles, which I'll, which we'll talk
to, um, after we, we, we kind of set the, the frame was
that those design principles again, resonated
to us across all of them.
The, under the requirement for understandable information,
the securing the information that matters,
and then identifying information that's connected,
trustworthy, and proportionate all makes complete sense.
So what was our submission about then?
Our submission was a response to that.
And what we're going to talk
to is about the REM methodology,
and then provide an example of how that's been used.
REM as a methodology has been around for more than 30 years,
and what it connects to of the eight improvement areas
that were presented in the interim report, the one
that's most, most relevant.
And we think the one that has the most important is that
of the enabler, because it, it's not about,
we don't believe the response to the reporting limitations
that were identified in interim report are adding new layers
or new systems or new processes,
but rather levering what we already have REM
as a methodology is built around people.
And that's been the, the, the, the secret source or,
or why it's been successful both here in New Zealand
offshore as a methodology.
It's been currently used in the GCC.
So if you can take a methodology that was built out
of New Zealand and apply it in different other
jurisdictions, you know that the methodology
and the frameworks that it provides are universal and it,
and they are, because it's about the people.
So REM stands for relational equity, uh, relationships,
equity and management,
where relationships is about aligning persons
or peoples that have a responsibility to an outcome.
Equity looks at what those role responsibilities are,
but in particular, accountability
and management defines the disciplines, processes
and systems that will deliver those outcomes.
Now, again, um, as the person said, just, uh,
before us, we take it that the submission was read.
And so you can see that from a framework perspective,
it's relatively easy to apply the re methodologies
of framework over a particular organization, enterprise or,
or initiative program of work.
That that's probably its strength.
When you look at each of those three, um, factors of, of,
uh, relationship equity management, A a again, the,
I think we provide an example across the
enabler, uh, sections.
We are looking at how do we best, uh, capture data
that could be enabled and used somewhere else.
What I wanted to, to talk to you
before I pass it across to James to provide an example
of REM in practice, um, is, is, is really
to focus on the delivery model.
Engage is is a very practical organization.
We understand the frameworks, we understand the theory on
how things are supposed to work, 'cause that's important,
but it's more about the how do you bring a delivery model
to address this or respond to the, the challenge that's, um,
that this committee, uh, has to address.
And if we think about the people, the first part
of the methodology, it says in practice, let's define a line
of sight and connect policy intent
through delivery into outcome.
And so you've seen that in our submission.
The minister establishes the policy intent that
that's pretty much universally agreed from that.
Then that informs the chief executive
of agencies whose job it is to take the policy intent
and then create, uh, directives, whether
that be within their own agency
or interagency from there, um, that, uh,
that directive informs our policy managers whose job it is
to implement that into the planning
and current reporting mechanisms.
And that's probably one of the key points out of our review
of, of this particular domain is to say, you,
you can see all of the reporting lines
that are held currently in the system,
the performance reporting and
or the, um, public accountability touch points.
It's as much a matter of connecting
and aligning more than anything else.
Now, from that policy manager, we get to the delivery lead,
again, takes the planning, uh, operationalize
and operationalizes that planning.
And then obviously it's the frontline delivery.
And I love what I heard just previous to our,
our conversation here is that we agree
and whole, that one of the key parts of, of that, uh,
performance reporting or, or
or requirement around accountability is that this model,
this system has to get to the frontline delivery
and has to engage, uh, those, uh,
New Zealand public, those stakeholders, whoever it is
that's supposed to benefit from the programs, it,
it must connect there.
Now, the thing about the REM model
before I pass to James is that,
and you would've seen in the submission,
while there's informing down that chain,
there's informed by up it.
So the REM model assures that there are data
and insights that while they run up back up the chain up
to a policy, you also have delivery adjustment.
Going back to frontline delivery again, um, James is, um,
more learned at re in fact, he developed a remodel
and he was, he has a, he has a, an example of
of, of re practice.
Just before we get onto that, the, the fundamentals
of the operating paradigm of RM is
that it clarifies relationship assumptions as
to why people are engaged, why organizations are engaged.
That's the relationship part.
The equity part is aligning functions
and roles around that understanding that was achieved as to,
uh, what the aspirations or,
or the proposition of the engagement was
that brought all those stakeholders together.
The, the last one is just integrating all the management
systems that will bring all that data that's created in
that framework together.
The example that I want to use is, uh, our work
with Transit New Zealand, 15 years, I was involved with the,
uh, state highway networks providing a whole lot
of services, advisory services around that.
One of the, one of the, the areas was, uh, the state, the,
uh, national state highway, uh, land transport strategy,
you know, is, is part
of the economic structure of New Zealand.
Auckland was falling behind in its, uh,
in its roading program.
And, and the minister at the time, um,
mark Gosey wanted that rectified.
So he got whole, got in touch with the CEO of transit
transit, called me in
and said, look, uh, the minister wants this sorted.
So can you come in and, and,
and provide us a bit of a brief on how you might do that.
We took that brief. The, the CEO put out some directives.
Uh, the regional manager, uh,
of transit Auckland picked up the responsibility
for implementing the plan.
And, uh, the,
and from there down the chain to the lead agencies
that were responsible for delivering parts
of the, uh, outcome.
And then down to the actual people on the ground
who were then able to implement
what was already established.
And so the, the, the protocols
that were started at the beginning filtered down
through the ranks or the, um, parts of the organization.
And one of the, one of the things that happened was that,
uh, the last 20 kilometers of, uh,
state highway one up to Cape Ringer.
'cause this pro project ended up being 400 kilometers from
Mary Mary to Capea to sort out all the issues, uh,
that were engaged in that problem.
They, we were able to identify, uh,
through our relationship, uh, dialogue
and analysis, what, what the issue was.
And then we were able to identify a solution, got everybody
to sign off on it.
And the economic benefits
of solving this particular problem was quite extensive,
as you might very well know, uh,
because it opened up a lot of tourism
and other employment and a
Whole lot of other social benefits.
Okay. Right. Okay. Thank you, gentlemen.
Uh, questions. We've got Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah. Uh, gentlemen, um, quite comprehensive
and integrated in terms of your approach.
And I, I'm gonna ask an eff efficacy question.
Um, really, so how, you know,
how's this gonna actually improve performance of what we do
and how we collect the information?
That's the first one. Yeah. How are we gonna do this better?
Um, and the second one is, um, how can we actually utilize
what you're talking about here to give us effect to
the good use of public money?
In a nutshell, that's the accountability part.
'cause that's what we're after. Yeah.
So those two questions.
It, it's a, a great, great. Two questions, David.
And, and I think the answer to that is
that REM addresses the limitations
that were identified in current performance, uh, reporting
that that's what it is.
So in terms of the delivery model
that's been explained in the submission, what it's able
to do is it answers the question
of do we have a connected system?
Yes. Is there an inter-agency mechanism that aligns the, uh,
different agencies involved in a program work?
The answer to that is, yes. We saw where we,
we saw a climate change program work.
I think it was a budget of 3.27 million.
Otherwise, it doesn't matter whether you agree
with the policy or not, but
what we saw was 22 different agencies somehow working
possibly not together on these particular outcomes.
So it answers the interconnect,
it answers the question about the, the lack of assessment
or reporting data, the depth of it,
because REM James kind of connected to it,
REM focuses a lot on the stakeholder engagement on ground,
the communities and NZ public.
Um, and so in terms of
how will it improve the performance reporting,
it addresses the limitations
that were identified in that report.
In terms of accountability, again, it takes a very, uh,
very, it anchors REM as a methodology
and as a delivery model anchors in community.
Um, we, we say stakeholders, local stakeholders, it, it,
it's something that we, we talk about a lot.
It's explicit in the REM methodology that they are
as important as any other part of that chain.
And, and the, the, uh, James might correct me if I'm wrong,
but that particular example that he
provided through the minister in, uh, uh,
New Zealand transport, there were barriers
and issues for 25 years.
Unresolved re methodology was applied,
and within 12 months, those major challenges
and barriers were removed.
And it came down to the simplicity of,
let's look at the people.
Let's get visibly on the delivery chain,
understand the outcome, and engage stakeholders.
So it was really that simple, which,
well, it was really that simple.
Okay. Right. We'll leave it at the, um, thank you, James.
Thank you, Dwayne, for your presentation
and, and for your submission.
Let's keep in touch with the process over the next,
um, six or so months.
Great. Thank you for your time. Thank
You.
Okay. Now we got the Chief Ombudsman, um, queued up.
Mr. Allen? Yes.
Thank you, chair. Oh, good, good.
Uh, afternoon, Mr. Allen.
And, uh, great to have you here on, um, uh, day one.
Uh, thank you. Obviously, you, your office brings a unique,
uh, all of government oversight perspective,
but I also wanna acknowledge
that you also bring the perspective
as a former CE of MFA as well.
So, uh, we thank you for your submission and,
and look forward to the discussion.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thought I'd frame, uh, the comments I'd make, uh,
against the overarching purpose
and vision, uh, statement in chapter six,
which I strongly support, uh,
because I think actually that goes to the heart of
what the Office of the Ombudsman is about.
And I think we can actively support, uh,
out better outcomes across those three criteria.
So the first obviously is accountability.
And the specific lens that the Office
of the Ombudsman brings, as you've recognized, uh,
is we bring a citizens' experience of engaging
with the agencies of the Crown.
So we are not looking at it in a top down way.
We're looking at it very much from the perspective, did this
actually work for New Zealanders?
Does it actually deliver an outcome for New Zealanders?
And what are the issues
and obstacles in the delivery of service
by particular agencies
that are being experienced by New Zealanders?
And we see that, of course, throughout complaints, data,
thousands of complaints in the course of a year,
specific lived experience by New Zealanders of engaging
with the Crown in various guises.
And so, as a consequence of that, uh,
we have a rich database that can support this committee
or any other committee of Parliament, uh, in understanding
what actually is happening in terms of the effectiveness
of agencies in delivering outcomes.
Uh, the second thing that we can do is on the basis
of understanding those various complaints, we can identify
systemic issues across agencies,
and we can see where the roadblocks are,
where the problems are, uh, which are constraining good
and effective service delivery.
And we can, as a consequence of own motion reviews, uh,
engage and investigation to, um, unlock, uh,
and address, at least make recommendations to address, uh,
resolutions of those particular issues.
And we've done that. Uh, in relation to corrections, uh,
we've done it in relation to orang.
Uh, we've done it in relation to mental health issues
where we've taken a set of complaints
in those specific areas, uh, identified systemic issues
and then developed solutions
or helped develop solutions, how that can address them.
Uh, the third area there is,
or second area there is improvement.
Uh, our reports obviously go to best practice in relation
to areas like, uh, official information compliance
and all of those sorts of things.
So there's a great wealth of information about
best practice in this office.
And then thirdly, trust, uh, which the availability
of information through the oi, uh,
official Information Act is a key component of,
now the question with the Official Information Act is
obviously compliance.
Uh, our view is that there's a deeply compliance culture,
a deeply risk averse culture, uh,
within the public sector in relation to availability
of information, a, a good news reporting culture,
if I can put it, uh, directly.
Uh, and that in fact, much
of this information could be proactively released, uh,
which would go to the building and strengthening of trust
and confidence in Parliament, uh,
which is the third criteria you've raised.
So, uh, Mr.
Chairman, what I'm trying to say to you is there's a wealth
of information within this office
that can support your work.
Uh, there is a real ambition within this office
to make systemic change.
Uh, and there is the capacity in the office to be able
to undertake reviews or investigations at your instance,
or at other committee's instance,
or at Parliament's instance, to be able
to improve public trust and confidence
and the performance of the system. Thank you.
Oh, thank you so much Mr. Allen, for that, uh, genuine
enthusiasm and, uh, uh, uh, invitation
for ongoing engagement with your office.
Uh, members. Do, do we have any, any questions
or points, uh, that need to be clarified for, um,
with the Ombudsman?
Okay. We'll leave, we'll leave it at that.
Mr. Allen, again, thank you, uh, for your submission.
Thank you for your willingness to, um,
be part of the process.
Uh, and, and I know you'll be very close to the office
of the Auditor General as well.
And so let's keep in touch
as we progress this public inquiry over
the next six or so months.
Excellent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay.
That leads us to, um, uh,
the Parliamentary Commissioner for the environment,
Mr. Chair. We don't have the
next submitters here yet,
but we do have Wendy McGinnis if we'd like to go to her.
Oh, Wendy from the McGinnis Institute? Yes. Okay.
Let's, let's go to her now.
She's the last members on our agenda,
but we'll, we'll bring her forward if she's happy with that.
Okay. How are we getting on?
Sorry, Mr. Chair. She's declined to, to, uh, come up.
Panelists, can I suggest instead we just do a,
a break till 10 past one?
Okay. Let's guys, we, we will do an eight minute break
and we'll be back, uh, ready to go.
10 past one for worth. Uh, Simon Upton. Thank you.
Right. Okay.
Oh, commissioner, we'll just give it, we, we'll give it
to our colleagues return.
We did say, uh, one 10, um,
but, so just bear with us.
Could you also just check please,
that Matt Patterson is a panelist.
Um, he's joining from overseas, actually.
Um, I'm not sure whether you, I've got two colleagues
coming in locally and one who's overseas.
So you should have Jeff Simmons, Peter Lee,
and Matt Patterson.
Yes. Uh, we looks like we might have all three. Good.
Let's just, um, just give it a couple of minutes.
'cause I do get in trouble. Um, Mr.
Upton, if I do start,
if I start early when I've promised the start time,
Pete, you've caught me out. If
you'd started early, I can tell you,
And of course, this is appointment viewing for our, um,
television audience, so we don't want Oh, absolutely,
Absolutely. We don't want, we don't
want them to miss it either.
Right? Okay. It's, it's, we are nearly there.
Uh, we know, um, Mr.
Up and you being a product, a political product
of the eighties and nineties,
those important reforming years that, uh, you'll be loving
to get your teeth around the possible amends
of the Public Finance Act and things.
That's, that's gonna, we, we,
you'll be very excited being part of that generation.
This, this may complete the, uh,
com complete the job in many ways.
Okay. Right. We've got Dr. Russell here.
We've got everyone here. Uh, welcome Commissioner.
We look forward to your, um, uh, to your presentation.
We've got 20 minutes here.
Uh, hopefully we can, um, complete it within that time.
But we welcome you and your colleagues.
Thank you. Um, and look, I, I would like to give most of
that time to you to ask questions.
So let me just make a few brief points.
Firstly, uh, I commend what you're doing.
I think it's really, really important, uh,
that you are asking questions about how Parliament holds
agencies and ministers to account
for how they spend public money.
So I'm, I'm right behind that.
Um, first point is, I think select committees need
to think about scrutiny differently.
I'm, I'm sorry, but I think we are wired
and it's centuries of wiring around an entity
and the money it's given,
and you're looking at the entity all the time.
I think we need to think about scrutiny. That's important.
That's very, very important from a
public finance point of view.
And that's what the audit office, uh,
does a very good job of.
Uh, but I think we need to think about scrutiny differently.
And everything I'm gonna say to you, I've been working
through with the audit office.
I don't think they'd disagree
with the broad thrust of where I'm coming from.
The second point is, uh, the committee needs
to think much harder about evaluation.
One thing to look at what's been announced
or what's been spent this year, uh,
but of course, evaluating along the way and down the track.
Now, there's an appendix to my submission, which I
strongly recommend that you read,
which says a bit more about that.
The third point is that, um, we need to be able
to ask questions about more than just what happens
inside an agency.
So if you've read my submission, you'll know I'm saying
that you need a higher level than just entities, um,
to ask good questions.
And I've suggested to you that that is at the level of,
shall we say, enduring or longer term outcomes.
And I think you've gotta be brave as mps
and start disentangling this stuff from short term point
scoring in the environment.
For instance, the things,
the problems we've got today will be
with us in 50 years time.
They won't be solved. We have to manage them.
We don't know often how best to manage them.
We're almost certainly gonna get stuff wrong.
So you have to be able in an adult way to say, look, okay,
well conceived, but did it deliver?
You know, in the medical world, people don't, uh, rush
to the media or to the courts.
If there's a medical mishap, they have a conference,
they talk about, you know, how can we learn from this?
And I think in a very different way, we need to be learning
as we go from what we are doing.
Fourth point, um, I haven't written a submission for you
as a sort of a good idea.
Light bulb. How about this?
What I'm, what I've put in front of you as a result
of six years work?
Um, I've done far more thinking about this, I think,
than anyone else in New Zealand in recent times.
Um, it's not just a good idea.
It's something that we have pioneered.
We've tested it out in practice.
We're now running on an annual basis.
I think it's a good, I think the, the estimate
of environmental expenditure we do, which is pitched
to the level of long-term enduring outcomes,
which run across all of government.
I think it works for the environment.
It, it won't necessarily work for other areas.
And you'll see from my recommendations,
I do not suggest you adopt this
as a standardized approach for all of government.
Different parts of government will probably lend themselves
to different inquiry, but the nature
of environmental problems, which are very, very long term,
is I think this works rather well for them.
Um, if I'm having a difficulty,
it's getting select committees to engage with the stuff,
because it seems a bit out of left field.
It's not what they're used to.
It's not, let's get dock in, or let's get MFE in.
It's, it's something different.
So it would help me if the committee recommended
that Parliament give the work that my office has pioneered
on environmental outcomes and performance.
A stronger mandate to proceed.
I mean, ultimately the standing orders have
to say something about scrutiny,
which is a bit broader than just entity level stuff.
It really is leading edge.
Um, I presented the work that I've done
to the international organization
of Supreme Audit Institutions earlier this year.
Uh, I don't think anyone else has done this
with the possible exception of Estonia.
And you'll often find in this life,
Estonia is ahead on all sorts of things,
digital and otherwise.
Uh, but with that single exception,
I don't think anyone's really been trying
to take the approach that we've taken here.
But just last week, we published
our fifth edition of Estimate Environmental Expenditure,
and we did a little bit of a, a, a zoom in on, uh, jobs
for Nature, okay.
Which is ran across different agencies.
Um, I think there is a lot, uh,
in there, which could help.
But you as a committee,
and you are the all powerful committee when it comes
to the Public Finance Act.
And the rest of it, you really need to be driving, uh,
some changes in parliament that encourage people
to take a broader view.
So I'll stop there and give you the rest
of the time, uh, for questions.
But we will run out of time.
Um, I would invite any of you who are interested
to come over and we can sit down
and go through this in detail.
'cause it represents a major investment
of time and taxpayers money.
Uh, and you need to, at least some
of you need to be across it.
Okay. No, no. Thank you.
And thank you for that, uh, ongoing invitation.
Um, uh, Dan Bidar.
Hey, thanks very much, Simon.
And, um, you'll be pleased to know
that this committee has discussed
that diagram in your expenditure work, um, extensively.
And I think actually there's one thing we can agree on is
the importance of that.
So not just in this committee,
I must say in several other committees.
So I think you'll be surprised, pleasantly surprised at
how many mps have, um, enjoyed
and grasped the importance of the work that you are doing.
Um, I guess I, I, I, I want you to help, um,
the committee understand
where this approach may, may be applicable too.
'cause if you look at all the select committees, actually,
I think probably mostly committees could do that kind of
inputs, outputs, analysis.
Um, what is the level of investment required to get to
that level where every select committee has that kind
of, um, lens?
And second to that, is that, I mean, you mentioned Estonia.
Is it, is it worth us doing a bit more investigation into
how Estonia does it, or,
or are you saying that we are actually leading in this area?
Well, to be frank, I mean,
if you spent six years on something local, I, I mean,
it's always interesting to see what others do,
but I, I, I think probably work that we've done can give you
as good a start as any, I mean, you need
to ask the auditor general that question as well.
Um, you mentioned the diagram, Dan, I mean,
and, and people love the diagram.
I mean, sanky diagrams is just addictive.
It looks, oh, wow, this is complicated
and we can connect this with that and so on and so forth.
I mean, environment, as I make the point
of my submission environment's a bit different from,
from some things, because the outcomes really are running
across all of New Zealand
and large numbers of agencies involved.
That will not be the case in other areas.
I mean, you take health, for instance,
I haven't looked at this, but I take it
that most money gets spent on health through Vote Health.
And so you don't need a multi-agency approach,
although there will be programs which spin over into
education, into corrections, into whatever.
But I mean, the health committee should be able to say,
we want to be able to identify any expenditure outside
of Vote Health, which contributes.
So we're aware of it. And so when a particular outcome
that our government says it's aiming
for is being talked about, yeah, we should be able
to pull in, we should know how much money
collectively is being spent, which able to pull people in.
I, I don't think you can hope for
a standardized, um, approach.
Uh, I really would suggest you have a,
a variable geometry approach
to use a wonderful piece of jargon.
Um, and the bit which is missing.
You see, I've done the long term outcomes
for the environment, and I don't think they're contentious
and they're in our environmental reporting,
you know, and all the rest of it.
But, but in other areas it may be more contentious.
But you've got to get the government of the day to say,
okay, you say you want good health for all, you know,
teenagers, or you want, uh, you want possums under control
or whatever, you know, predators under control by 2050.
Okay, you are not gonna be there forever.
What are your medium term objectives?
How do they relate to those long-term ones?
That's what you've gotta get governments to come up with.
Uh, and they should be able to tell you, I mean,
after all, you're all elective with manifestos.
This is what we are gonna try to do.
Okay, that's your outcome.
Let's see how you're spending the money to promote that.
That's what you want to do.
Yeah. No, that's great, Simon.
And just a second point, um, you, you mentioned coming over
and actually, um, having a meeting with yourselves,
I think personally I would like that opportunity.
So, um, it'd be great with you on that. Yeah, thank
You. Please do.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, Dr. Deborah Russell,
Uh, excuse me.
Thank you. Um, Simon, um, I was just thinking in terms of
that sanky di diagram, um, an obvious place to use it
as in the justice cluster.
Um, you know, you just, yeah.
Would be a, uh, I was just, it took me a while to think
of something, but the justice one would be one, you know,
maybe like in the Family
and sexual violence program, um, uh,
we all love the Sanky diagram.
Um, it would take, you said it took a considerable amount
of time and resource in order to develop it.
And of course we've got a cost constrained government,
so we're kind of fighting against that too.
It would take a fair amount of resourcing.
I, I think it's important, but what's your,
I wouldn't understate that.
I mean, if people want to make something, uh, difficult,
if you wanna put it into the complicator, um,
then I'm sure you could spend an limited amount.
I've done this on 0.4 of an FTA year. Okay.
Right. And a lot of very positive constructive engagement
with government departments.
So we've had to say to them, look, this is what we're doing.
It's not the way you're currently reporting.
Could you help us isolate the money you think,
which contributes to these different outcomes?
I have to say, almost without exception,
they've been very, very helpful.
So, yep. They, they, they diverted a little bit of time
and human resource to help.
Remember, this is not public finance act sort
of gold edge quality stuff where you have to be able
to account for every cent.
This is stuff about how money's being mobilized
after broad outcomes.
So it doesn't need some spurious level of precision.
I think we've got it good enough.
Now, I have to say, if you say good enough
to the audit office or the treasurer,
they probably slightly recall
'cause they don't live in that sort of world.
But I think you've gotta feel comfortable about having other
ways of calling people to account.
So I, I, I don't think it needs to be hugely expensive.
Uh, look, I've got three people online.
One of them is Peter Lee, who's my statistical expert.
He has spent, he understands
how public finance is put together.
He has spent a lot of time, which is why if he came
and talked to us, we could tell you about the methodology.
We've developed a methodology which is transparent
and we can account for,
but that's taken him some time to put together.
But it's there now. It's, it's a working model.
And, and we, I really would appreciate the committee's
support, uh, in saying, yeah, this is worth doing.
Saying that, that we have talked to agencies about
how this could be operationalized.
And although different agencies have different accounting
systems, uh, they do all have the ability to, to code
spending in a certain way, a certain way.
Just what we hear time
and time again, is, is that what they would need is
that consistent long-term set of outcomes
with which to do that coding.
If that was provided and,
and it lasted across governments, it would be fairly simple
for them to operationalize this.
Okay, thank you. Yeah, I was gonna say, a,
a key starting point is making sure you're defining
what those long-term outcomes are.
And we, Simon went about that.
And so we, we were able to, to say,
these are the long-term outcomes we're gonna focus on.
And starting to work with agencies to
classify expenditure according to them.
If you're doing this in other sectors, you'd,
someone else would need to do that and,
and make that that decision.
So that's a key thing to consider who, who will be defining
what those long-term outcomes are.
And for other sectors, it might be a group
of CEEs, for example.
'cause you, you want to try
and come up with outcomes that are relatively apolitical
and are gonna survive different types of governments.
Yep. So, um, that's helpful. Thank you.
Because to, i, I do wanna come across
and talk about it at some stage next year, not this,
but Fran, Fran this year.
But, um, in terms of that 0.4
of an FTE plus some other costs obviously associated
with it, it's, it's not insurmountable by any means.
Um, I just wanna go back to another point you made Simon
and you, um, were talking about how
as mps we possibly need to forego the, um,
cheap political point, which is, uh, in order
to get the longer term outcome we want as parliamentarians.
Um, it's very sweet.
I mean, I agree, but it is, you know,
with the trouble is we do work in an intensely political
environment and it's really hard to,
to find that way forward.
And, um, you know, I, I take your point,
but that's actually a really hard thing to do.
Well, look, of course, I'm not suggesting you evacuate
politics from this one thing we can be sure of.
Governments have never even approached perfection.
There'll be plenty of cockups and stuff ups to get into.
I, I don't deny that for a minute.
Um, but in addition to that, there is the, you know, the run
of the mill business, which just doesn't
feature on the radar screen.
And as the stewards of the public's money,
I think you're required to ask questions about stuff, even,
which, if it appears to be working, um, you know, are we,
are we really making the progress you want to, I'd like
to think that ministers were interested in asking
these questions as well.
Um, so I I,
I'm not suggesting you evacuate politics from this, but,
but you know, again, look at the way we think at present,
the treasury, um, spends a large amount
of time looking at new expending initiatives.
You know, so the whole thing's on new expenditure
and the budget's all about what's new.
There is a vast 98% baseline in there,
which just goes on like a super tanker.
Some of that stuff is really important for New Zealand
and being able to ask questions about it in a sensible way,
um, I think you'd find whether you are in government
or opposition, hugely valuable.
Yeah. Okay. Um, just one last comment.
You know, obviously you've got, um, climate adaptation
and greenhouse gas emission sitting in your sanky diagram
as part of the, um, I, I must say, um, have you done,
I'd be in, I can see the, the, some of the detail on that,
but I, I'd certainly be interested in seeing more
of the detail on that one.
So I might come across and, um,
and dig into that a little, if I may.
Please do. And, and, and that's one where we'd like
to see much more transparency about what's mitigation
and what's adaptation.
Yeah. Uh, and you'll find some text.
Have you, have you looked at last week's edition,
which came out because, um, there's,
there's this reference to that there.
All of you should be aware
and we can send it to you if you like.
The, the the 25 26 edition of
EEE came out last week
and you were all at least
electronically notified as far as I'm aware.
Okay. Thank you. Okay. Uh, Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, chair. Um, afternoon, Simon.
Um, just in your report
and appreciate, we're not gonna have time to go too deep,
but you mentioned sectoral approach quite,
quite a lot both across, um, the reporting
and at the, um, I guess the accountability end
of it across sector.
So what you're saying is,
and I guess your sen diagram highlights that, um,
there's not enough cohesion across, um,
expenditure at the top end.
So I was just interested around your thoughts on, you know,
sectors and did you have a view as to
how many there should be or shouldn't be?
Um, yeah,
No, quite explicitly.
I, I, I've only looked at environment. Okay.
That's, that's my role. It would be improper for me
to be off into other areas.
But, um, I'm pretty clear if you look at our state
of the environment reporting that there are five, you could,
you could just about fit any environmental issue under
one of five headings.
And then if you look at the sanky diagram,
that yellow one in the middle is improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of institutions designed
to manage human interventions in the environment.
So that's, that's if you like the, the bureaucracy
of running things like the EPA
and the Resource Management Act and all of that stuff.
Um, and, and that's the one by the way,
if you look at this year's, uh, numbers,
that's the one which is growing.
Everything else is falling, but we're spending more
and more on, on, on policy development.
So that's an interesting thing to follow up.
But the sector environment,
I think we've got it pretty well defined now.
Um, Dr. Russell has mentioned justice. That's a sector.
Uh, I think that, you know, some parts
of government fit rather nicely under that heading when you
and, and education will and health will as sectors,
but they're ni they're easier to cope with
because you tend to put your money through a single entity,
through a single portal.
So you know, the, that they'll be easier to do, uh,
what you need, if you want to look, look, look,
map this across government, I mean, I'd ask them,
ask the audit office what they think
and how many, how many sectors could this usefully apply to?
And, and we've done the thinking for this one.
So they do have a model to work from. Okay,
Thank you. I think,
I think what you'll find is for many
of the sectors, they'll have two, three,
maybe four major departments, which is
what we've found environment.
But also by taking a sexual approach, you start
to mop up some of the smaller ones.
I mean, we, we have TPK
or, uh, ministry of Justice
contributes some stuff to the environment.
You'll find the same thing in, in the justice sector.
There might be some social services
or some health stuff that also contributes.
But only once you've defined those long-term outcomes,
can you start to think, oh,
which are the small contributors
into these outcomes as well.
Sometimes those small contributors know tons.
I mean, I am told, I haven't personally spoken to 'em,
but I'm told that defense knows quite a lot.
You'll see they're in there, defense knows quite a lot
'cause it's got a, an estate of land, it's managing stuff,
it's coping with pests and so on, so forth.
Um, are they aligned with
what the government's doing elsewhere?
Are they not, uh, you know, what can we learn from them?
They may have done something which was a
hell of a lot cheaper and better.
I, I, the, so as Matt says
that the small ones can often yield
as many insights as the big ones.
We tend all of those on this call.
We tend to talk to the Wellington based policy bureaucracy,
but there is a lot of stuff out there, um,
which goes beyond that.
Thank you. Okay.
Uh, any, any other questions, uh, members or Mr.
Upton and colleagues, have you got any uh, uh,
concluding remarks?
I, my concluding remarks, can
I just say something Tam Sorry,
Sorry, just you raise my hand.
Um, Simon, I have just pulled up your current, um,
SANKY report and thank you.
It's fantastic. I'm just gonna note that environmental
exp expen, sorry, climate expenditure 24 25 was 1.2 billion.
And climate expenditure 25, 26 is
six 56 million.
So a huge reduction.
I mean, that's one of the really useful
things about your report.
Thank you. That it helps us to identify that sort of thing.
And I appreciate those things are a bit of an approximation,
not a, a detailed one for, you know, as you said,
it's, um, but it's pretty good.
Well, pretty good estimate, I said. Okay.
Thank you, uh, Dr. Russell.
And, um, uh, for those that are, uh, wondering what,
what we're talking about on the Sankey, um, graph, then
that is page four.
It's on the parliamentary website of, of the commissioner's,
um, uh, submission, uh, page four.
And it shows the, uh, 24, 25, um, environmental expenditure
by government agencies well worth having a look
at in your submission.
So, um, thank you so much. Uh, we appreciate that.
We appreciate the ongoing, um, invitation, uh, to come
and see you and to, uh, yes, to, to dig deeper.
And we will, it sounds like
members are keen to take that up.
Thank you. We'd appreciate that.
And just look at the last line of my submission, which says,
the committee could recommend
that parliament give the work on environmental outcomes
and performance a stronger mandate.
To be frank, I think committees think, wow,
this is an interesting idea.
It's a good idea, but you know, why should we do it?
Uh, uh, if you want the stuff to move forward, you
as a committee need
to recommend that someone does something.
I've gone as far as I can go using my office.
Yeah, no, that, that's fine.
And, uh, as you would've seen
with our banking inquiry recommendations, we got, um,
almost, uh, unanimous support and most of them.
And, um, uh,
we also gave some pretty strong recommendations out there
to the banking regulators
and sector players, uh, that have since been taken up.
So we have got good form.
You can be rest assured that we will be, uh, wanting
to make, uh, recommendations that stick going forward.
You very much. Okay. Thank you Mr.
Upton, and thank you to your colleagues.
Okay, Mr. Clark, and welcome to, uh, penny Hera too.
Nice to see you, penny. Okay. We've got, have we got Dr.
Bryce Wilkinson here, New Zealand, uh, initiative? Yes,
We do.
Okay.
Okay. Bryce, I think it looks like you've logged onto
another computer in another room,
so we you might have some, um,
Yes, We, we might not lose you this time. Uh,
Yes. My apologies. Apologies
For Yeah, no, that's all right.
Um, uh, sorry that that happened this morning, but, uh,
nonetheless, we've got you here for a p uh,
potentially up to 20 minutes.
Uh, we've got the NZI New Zealand initiative, um,
submission, and, uh, we look forward
to your, to the discussion.
Yes, thank you. Oh, some brief open opening remarks then.
Um, thank you very much, um, for the opportunity to speak,
um, on the New Zealand initiative submission.
Uh, we think this is a very important inquiry
and to performance reporting in in
public, uh, accountability.
I mean, the stark reality is
that total crown spending is about 190 billion approaching
190 billion annually.
Uh, but we know remarkably little about how much of
that represents value for money.
And, um, this extraordinary situation does deserve, um,
um, great attention.
And so the initiative strongly supports this inquiry, uh,
parliament's ability to hold the executive accountable
for value for money is fundamental
to both our democratic governance
and our economic wellbeing.
And our submission makes three core arguments.
First, the current system lacks adequate incentives
and checks to ensure public, uh,
resources are used effectively.
And the executive naturally has an advocacy bias when
presenting policies.
And the administrative state has both an information
advantage and institutional incentives
that favor opacity over transparency.
Second, while requiring clearer objectives from the
executive, it is important
that we shouldn't expect complete transparency
about the deeper reasons behind policy decisions.
Coalition governments involve compromises,
and the good reasons given publicly may
differ from the real reasons.
And what matters most is whether the interventions deliver
net benefits that justify their costs.
And that's the important thing to try and get clarity about.
Third, and most importantly,
we think parliament needs greater independent
analytical capacity.
Um, we propose establishing a parliamentary review office,
call it an office of, uh, fiscal
and regulatory analysis if you prefer.
And this body would provide parliament
with expert independent assessments
of whether both spending programs
and regulations deliver value for money.
It could conduct a zero based reviews
learning from Netherlands successful model.
Beyond this, we suggest strengthening standing orders,
although we have not gone into detail on that,
to enforce compliance with reporting requirements, including
mandatory sunset clauses for new initiatives.
We also encourage considering mechanisms
for direct accountability to taxpayers, perhaps
through strike down referendum as you successfully
in, uh, in Switzerland,
we're a bit more dubious about initiative referendum.
The committee has an opportunity here
to fundamentally improve
how New Zealand managers nearly
190 billion in annual spending.
Um, it's not a case of whether we need reform.
It's a case of what's the best thing to do
and the most appropriate, uh, thing to do.
And, um, my final remark is, you know, this committee has,
uh, considered the regulatory standards bill, which is,
is now an act.
And I, I very much see that as being of the same.
I, it was, it, it imposes, um,
requirements on the executive government
to report on aspects of the regulatory thing,
but leaves parliament entirely software it as to
what it decides to do with that information
and the initiatives long promoted a fiscal council.
Uh, but in, in this particular submission here,
I'm suggesting it's, it's, uh, could be a broader agenda
to cover both the fiscal and the regulatory side.
So, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Oh. Oh, thank you, uh, Dr. Wilkinson,
for those introductory remarks, we're gonna go to Dr.
Uh, Russell.
Um, thanks, Bryce.
Um, I agree with some of what you say, not not all of it,
but, um, this office of, um, review.
Um, it's an interesting suggestion saying you, uh,
particularly needing the analytic capability, um,
and, um, to help, um, mps
as opposed to the executive.
I, I, I think that's an interesting suggestion
that we do get faced with Grace lodges of information.
It's very hard to find our way through it.
Um, I guess I'm always reluctant
to set up yet another office.
Is it something that could be done
within the audit office if the audit office was
funded to do it?
Yes, that's an option.
And I haven't recommended that
because, um, it requires a different set of schools.
Um, it, you know, economic analysis, uh, you have
to identify what would've happened otherwise, uh,
and given technological change
and, um, what other things were possible that's, um,
that's difficult to do.
And it's a different school from just working out
where the government spends money has been sent on the means
for which it was appropriated
and, uh, whether, uh,
it got into the pockets it was intended that had gotten to,
so while it could be done, um, my instinct is to
not, to, not to confuse
and broaden the auditor, general, the controller
and order to general's office,
but leave, leave it, uh, focused on what it does now.
And I've been very complimentary to it over
for many years now about how well it is doing its job
and just wishing that more often when it blew the whistle,
uh, there wasn't greater public attention to that
and more visible results.
Mm-hmm. So that's, yeah.
So that's why we, we propose a separate fiscal council
rather than wanting to sit it in that office,
but these things are open for discussion about what's best
and what's practicable. Yeah.
And one of the things that strikes me, we could do, having
that kind of analytic capacity
is also the work we've often talked around about around, um,
party manifestos and election promises and costings
and some of those sorts of things too, which
also sits exactly in that what if space.
Um,
Yeah, so on, on that matter, I've been, um,
pushing against having this body to comp, um, uh, sort
of cost out, um, political parties campaign, um,
uh, promises or, or plans.
Um, it, it would start to politicize the office a bit,
and it's hard to do because often what's in a party
manifesto, the details aren't spelled out
unless you know how broad and far reaching it is
or how narrow it is.
Um, uh, anything, any costing you're going to give is going
to be rather speculative.
And if it's not what one of the other parties wants to hear,
then Maggie immediately going to attack it.
And that entity is going to look, uh, is just going
to get sucked into a political debate, which
I can't really hope to win.
Yeah. The, and the other thing,
the other reason why I hesitate on that aspect is that
to me, our system is working quite well at the moment
that the major political parties have been hiring
independent, um, uh, economic experts, um, inform metrics
and build and the like to do their costings for them.
And it seems to me that's a much better arrangement.
That's, it's not something taxpayers need to fund,
and it's tricky for them to fund,
but that's just my personal opinion. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Uh, Todd Stevenson Act.
Thank you. Um, Bryce, you mentioned in your, uh,
remarks about zero based budgeting
and was it the Netherlands you mentioned do that,
but can you just explain how, how that would actually add
to, um, I suppose accountability and transparency?
Transparency? Uh, yes.
The, the idea there is that, um, with productivity change,
um, departments should be able
to keep running their existing programs, uh, uh, along
with funders and overs, depending on population growth and,
and changing relative demands out of their existing.
So, um, if they want an increase in the budget, they need
to make a, an explicit case for that.
Um, so you don't necessarily get automatic, um,
increases in base spending unless of course it's a benefit
or something which is tied to wages or the CPI
and it's a contractual thing that, that has
to go up with that.
Thank you. Uh, Bryce, you, I know you'd said you didn't,
um, have a, you didn't add a lot of detail
around your proposal to strengthen
strengthening standing orders,
but in saying that you do make the comment ensuring
that key documents are subject to scrutiny.
Just, uh, can you just give us a definition of
what those key documents are
and what are not being scrutinized
or are not being scrutinized enough in your view?
Yes. What was motivating That was, um,
some material I read about how select committees get dilu
with, with documents
and don't have time to, um, you know, to, to get,
get on top of them all.
And they're not all properly serviced
with earth quality regulatory impact
statements and the like.
So, um, standing orders can specify
what the, what, uh, what the documents are,
which the executive government sort of takes into parliament
to, um, assess and debate and make decisions on.
So the idea there was
that if select committees are finding they're not being
adequately serviced and,
and the documents they're getting aren't really up
to standard, um, it's through standing orders
that they would put more pressure on the government
of the day to do a better job in those respects.
Mm. Okay. Okay. Members, anything else for Dr. Wilkinson?
Okay, we will leave it at that.
Thank, thank you, uh, Dr. Wilkinson for,
um, joining us today.
Thank you for your submission
and let's, um, keep in touch
as we progress this, um, public inquiry.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Okay.
Members, uh, Mr. Clark h how have we got next?
Have we got the salary? We're slightly ahead of time.
The Association of Salaried Medical Specialists.
Are they on queue? Yes. We're just bringing them in now.
Oh, good. Good to see Mike Davidson from
the Green Party here too.
Thanks, Mike.
Okay. Good afternoon. Have we got Harriet there, Harriet?
Wild.
Oh, we have, we got a, uh, a video. There we go.
Kiata, Kiata. Harriet Kiata.
Cameron, thank you for being, being here well in advance.
Uh, we're running ahead of
schedule, which is quite exciting.
With free to go, we might,
I might actually fulfill the promise
of two 30 finish, so we're in your hands.
Um, you have got up to, um, uh, 20 minutes if we need
that much, so thank you.
Sure. Well, t my name is Harriet Wild
and I am the Director of Policy
and research at to Maura, the Association
of Salaried Medical Specialists
for A-S-M-S-A-S-M-S is the Union
and Professional Association for Senior Doctors
and dentists in Aldo New Zealand.
I will take our submission as read
and now our submission today, I would like to talk, talk
through some of our experiences with performance reporting
and accountability data.
And as a health union, we are extensive users
of performance reporting official information
and accountability data.
I'll be using mostly examples drawn from the health sector.
Our main points are there are significant gaps in health
data, which impacts directly on performance report
and public accountability.
These data gaps cover fundamental aspects
of our health system, including unmet
need and health workforce.
We urgently need to address these gaps in order
to improve system efficiency, patient outcomes,
and develop our workforce to meet our needs.
Our policy and research work is undertaken both in-house
and commissioned externally.
We rely on timely access to information
and data about the operation of the health system,
the health workforce, and health outcomes of New Zealanders.
We often use this data alongside surveys
of our members' experiences as senior doctors
and dentists to shine a light on the
New Zealand public health system.
Through our research
and policy work in different structural iterations
of the health system, we find there is much room
for improvement in health performance reporting.
We have characterized health system performance reporting,
and our submission as disconnected, opaque, and partial.
This is despite the ever increasing interest in our public
health system and its performance.
The SSOs issues Monitor continues to have health
and hospitals as its number two issue for New Zealanders
and the number one for New Zealanders.
Over 65 people are deeply interested
and invested in the funding functioning
and future of our public health system.
We have found monitoring
and evaluation deficits nearly everywhere.
We look in health at the district,
regional, and national level.
At the international level.
Our recent report on health financing
and expenditure from the University of Auckland,
professors Tim Binzel
and Paula Log, found that the Ministry of Health has failed
to provide health expenditure data to the OECD.
Since 2018, New Zealand is the only OECD country not
providing this information.
And in June this year,
the OECD published a report titled Best Practice in
Institutionalizing Health Accounts.
And noted quote, with the exception of New Zealand,
all OECD countries currently submit some data on health
spending and financing based on the system
of health accounts.
2011 core classifications, health financing,
healthcare services, and health providers.
A table on page 16
of this report shows New Zealand accompanied by a blank row.
Because we haven't submitted any returns,
the OECD has been estimating
and extrapolating our health expenditure based on
that 2018 return.
This is important because when ministers are asked about
how New Zealand compares internationally on health
expenditure, all will say we are quote above average.
We cannot in fact make this statement
because we simply don't know how we compare further.
New Zealand adds GST to its public health expenditure data.
And while technically this is not incorrect
or wrong, according to the accounting systems used
by the OECD, New Zealand is unique in the way it applies GST
to public health expenditure.
So this impacts on the way
that health expenditure figures ordered to the OECD
and may have significant over
the New Zealand's tax based expenditure
and reported OECD figures every year.
As a result, when minister's briefings
and official websites say
that New Zealand's health expenditure is above average,
the public will believe them.
Performance and reporting
and accountability data seems to me like an iceberg.
Often just the tip is publicly accessible.
The far more important, relevant
and interesting information, the bulk
of information lies hidden beneath the surface.
The hidden information is often not published in any form
and must be requested through the Official Information Act.
Sometimes the data we require
to construct a comprehensive analysis on the performance
of fundamental aspects of our health system,
namely unmet need
and the health workforce is not routinely collected.
Data is often fragmented,
inconsistent if it's collected at all.
We regularly find gaps in published performance reporting,
which we would consider basic outcome measures.
These are things like the number of healthcare workers
by headcount and FTE in any hospital district
by professional group role or service, hospital bed numbers
and occupancy rates.
Emergency department capacity to cope with surges in demand
clinical thresholds for access to services,
clinical accountability and adverse events data.
And on this last point, we note
that Health New Zealand was not publishing adverse events
data until uncovered by the media
and then directed to, to resume that posting, um,
by the Ombudsman.
Even now, nearly six months since that decision,
health New Zealand has only published data from Capital
Coast and HU Valley District.
The single report reveals for the first time ever
that deaths and adverse events have occurred due
to resource constraints.
Since the health reforms,
A SMS has observed a decline in reporting
and accountability to local communities about health needs
and the state of services
provided by Health New Zealand locally.
Some local accountability could have been achieved
through localities and iwi Maori partnership boards,
but localities have been discontinued
and the accountability role
of these boards has been weakened in the changes
to the Payor Healthy Futures Act.
One way government could provide greater public
accountability information to communities would be
through reporting on unmet need.
Communities require accessible regular reporting
to support their understanding
of population health within their district,
including health status, access to care, equity
or obligations, quality of care, health outcomes,
and system efficiency.
Data collected through the New Zealand Health Survey tracks
unmet need for primary care, dental care,
and for mental health care.
But there is currently no meaningful mechanism
to determine unmet need for hospital
and outpatient specialist care.
Our members inform us
that more referrals are being declined due
to workforce shortages and budget constraints.
We have recently found out that the number
of declined referrals are not being collated nationally,
so there's no overall picture of the scale
of need for planned care.
Our analysis shows
that waiting lists are effectively being managed
by declining referrals.
And the true wait list for a first specialist appointment
or treatment will far exceed available system capacity
First, first specialist appointment wait list.
Numbers are in fact flatlining
because the threshold to get on the wait list is so high
to improve our understanding of the total unmet need
for healthcare regular population surveys by age, ethnicity,
region deprivation, and disease prevalence are all critical.
Also critical is accurately reporting the iceberg
of planned care data.
This reporting must include information on
all patient journeys.
What is above the surface of the actual FSA wait list
and what is hidden below the surface being this being the
many thousands of people with their referrals declined.
The recent A SMS report managed, declined by our economist,
Andrea Black, provides insights
and presents implications on our health status
and levels of unmet health need.
The report analyzes nearly 15 years
of the self-reported health status question in the
New Zealand Health Survey.
She found that the proportion
of New Zealanders in excellent health is declining by 2036.
If current trends continue, there will be fewer than 7%
of New Zealanders in excellent health.
The proportion of New Zealanders in fair health is rising
and it is rising for people of working age
more than more than people over the age of 65.
People in fair health are much more likely
to require health services than people in excellent health.
And as fair health has increased in the population,
so has unmet need for primary care, mental health services,
and oral health care.
Moving to workforce, our experience
of publicly available workforce data is
that it is unreliable and incomplete.
Data on health workforce capacity
and capability is largely non-existent.
The size of the health workforce is not determined
by current demand or unmet need for care, but by budgets.
Our systems do not enable meaningful planning, budgeting,
or forecasting for the health workforce
and do not account for demand or unmet need.
Some systems such as rostering
and scheduling still require paper reports.
Ultimately what this means is a system run on the goodwill
of health workers to cover entrenched shortages.
We note that the recently announced digital health
investment plan includes a component
for a human capital management system that seek
to address some of these issues,
including workforce planning and rostering.
While this is a welcome development,
these are urgently needed upgrades,
which will still take 10 years to be operational according
to the plans timeline.
Our surveys and analysis
of the senior medical workforce reveal
that doctors are struggling to cover for absent colleagues,
provide appropriate time and training to registrars,
and have time to provide patient-centered care
to patients in whanau as demand for care grows.
These measures must be part of any public accountability
or performance reporting.
We do not have a workforce target
nor measurable workforce recruitment and retention goals.
The health workforce takes up about two thirds
of operational spending.
The ability of that workforce to work most effectively
and efficiently is the make or break of the health system.
We strongly recommend developing a regular
publicly reported comprehensive health workforce census.
This could not only serve
to fill the data gaps on workforce numbers,
but also provide valuable qualitative insights into job
satisfaction and where changes needed in a dynamic
and constantly evolving system.
In summary, the gaps in health performance reporting
and accountability data are stark
and baseline information on unmet need
and the health workforce does not exist.
We urgently need to address these gaps in order
to improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of the health system outcomes
for patients, and to develop a health workforce
that has the capacity
and capability to meet our growing health needs.
Kilda.
Thank you very much. Um, Ms. Wild, that's loud and clear.
Uh, as was your, um, written submission, um, members,
uh, Dr. Debra Russell,
Uh, excuse me.
Sorry. Thank you. That was, um, pretty sobering
to hear all of that.
Can I just clarify, I missed the date when you said
we'd last sent data.
Was, am I right? Was that 2018?
Correct. 2018.
Okay. And is that,
where is the responsibility for that lie?
Does it lie within the ministry?
Correct. The Ministry of Health
And, sorry, again, one clarification.
Was it the data for 2018
or was the last time we sent data was in 2018?
It was for previous years.
The last, uh, so the, the return is made every year. Yeah.
Um, and the last time we submitted data was in 2018,
So it would've been for the
2017 year or something like that.
Yeah, 20 17, 20 18 year.
Okay. Thank you. Um, I guess we better leave
that in the hands of the health committee to, um,
follow up on that.
Um, um, I just wanted to clarify that, but thank you.
That was pretty, um, sobering to hear all that.
I guess it, um, it goes to, uh,
health reporting within health rather than
across the broad sweep of government.
But, um, uh, one of the things,
I don't know if you heard the Parliamentary Commissioner
for the environment's, um, submission and
or whether you've seen his sanky diagrams.
No, I haven't. Right, okay.
So they're really interesting 'cause they look at
where health spend is coming from right across government.
And he felt, you know,
obviously the health scene is probably mostly like virtually
all of it within the health vote.
Um, but I think it'd be interesting to, for us
to ever think about how that could be captured within
a sanky diagram or where we, how we can link inputs
to outcomes over time. But anyway, yeah, and
You'll have seen from our submission that, um,
the Simpson Review in, um, in 20 20 19 acknowledged that,
you know, 80% of of health, um, health determinants sit
outside the health system.
So having those, uh, multi-agency cross
really cross government, um, accords to,
to improve health outcomes will, will improve, um,
improve things for everyone.
Yeah. Okay. Look, thank you.
We really appreciated your submission.
Okay. Any other, uh, questions for Harriet Wild members?
Okay, look, thank you so much for your submission.
Uh, I, I do note here that you, uh,
obviously support the intent of the inquiry
and feel it's long overdue.
And that is something that all of us, um,
would arguably agree on. So thank you.
Thank you. We are really, um, we we're, we are really keen
to see what happens next.
Um, and we do think it's, it's critically important and
Yeah, no, well please to keep involved.
Please stay engaged as we continue
to work on this over the next six months or so.
Thank you. Thank you. Right.
We have got Wendy McInnis.
I can see her online, um, from the McInnis Institute.
Thank you for, um, uh, jumping into the spot
as we are running a little bit ahead of time, Wendy, lovely
to see you again
and, um, we look forward to your presentation.
Great. And can I just check, um,
you can see the PowerPoint slide,
Uh, uh, are we sharing a screen, Mr. Clark?
Sorry, I'll just sit back out again and just check.
I've got shared here.
There We go. I'll just go onto to view.
So thank you very much. Um, okay.
Hopefully we've got, can you see the PowerPoint slide?
Yes, we can. Yes. Fantastic. Thank you.
Well look, opening remarks, um, clearly I've been around
for a wee while I've seen, um, massive sort
of focus on this area.
Um, I wanted to just like clarify,
the Public Finance Act had a very strong relationship.
I was in the treasury at the time on the Public Finance Act,
um, looking at the relationship between Department
of Ministers, so it was our minister and our department.
So that was the area of focus.
And what you've done in your wonderful terms
of reference has expanded that.
And I think that's terribly important.
Um, and I think it's very timely the, um, focus
that you've created in your terms
of reference is the focus on the public and the parliament
and almost everything else in between.
So if you're looking at like a chain, you've taken the chain
that was in existence with the Public Finance Act
and you've sort of put it within that broader context,
and I think it's terribly timely to do that.
Um, one of the things,
so we've actually been looking quite closely at the concept
of public accountability and the very back slide.
I've actually got some links.
Um, so public accountability is sort
of a co accounting concept,
and I've put a couple of links in the very back for those
that wanna go there in terms of what the XRB
and what sort of said, um, well broadly
around public accountability
because it's clearly underlines the reporting framework
across everywhere.
Um, so I've put those links in there just in case you
weren't sort of fully aware of that.
The, um, the most important thing I think
for me is you can't have, um, performance
or public accountability without real clarity
over what the goals are.
Goals. So you can't measure success if you dunno
what success looks like.
And so I just wanted to raise that.
So I've sort of identified seven things
that I thought if I could briefly talk to, um,
before you ask me, hopefully some questions.
So a clarity of goals, um, just extremely important.
And particularly of course, they're going to change.
Um, and every government
that comes in is going to have new goals.
The clarity over that I think is terribly poorly managed.
Um, and I, I've given you some really quick examples over,
um, I think we're moving away from technical terminology
and we really need to revisit it
because it's the only thing
that gives us comparability and accountability.
So we've had a time when we had strategic result areas.
We've had focus areas,
we've had better public service targets.
We've had, we've got the, currently we've got the target,
um, the target areas.
Um, we've got physical objectives
and policy objectives and the budgets.
Um, but we haven't got any sort of consistent language.
And I think that even if different governments want
to have different language, it would be really nice if they
turned around and said, oh, what we mean
by better public services targets is blah, blah, blah.
Um, and so that means that right at the very top,
it's very hard from the general public perspective
to actually understand what, um, the goals of government.
So therefore, if you don't know the goals of government,
you can't hold them to be accountable.
So your system falls down at the first hurdle,
which is really what I wanted to say.
Um, second thing is,
we have created obviously a consolidated financial statement
of government, which of course I clearly support.
Um, but we actually haven't got a place, um,
or a space where we can measure the goals
of government against the financial reporting mechanisms.
And so my view is that the cons,
there should be a consolidated annual report,
and that should be, um, have a commentary
that actually says, these are the goals of government
and this is the performance of government.
So it may be very, um, uh, you know, a political bridge
and I, I kind of, I can understand how people might say, oh,
well that's gonna make a, um, might be challenging,
but it actually is an enormous opportunity for that,
um, building that bridge.
And that bridge doesn't currently exist.
And I'll give you, um, an example where lux
and nine goals are being reported on by the DPMC.
Now, uh, that's where the report goes.
And actually that's one of the slides,
so I can just point it to you after this.
But, so the concept is that we are having these goals
of government, which the public, I think have a full right
to know and understand.
Um, and even the government departments
or officials need to have clarity over
that doesn't have a home.
And what we need to do, I think, in terms of trying
to improve performance
and public accountability is have real clarity at the front
end every year about what government's trying to do.
Um, number four,
there is consolidated climate statement for all of government.
Um, there is a climate emergency, um, and I,
and I use that word 'cause I actually think there's a
climate crisis, not an emergency.
Um, and I think that every country is different
and we need to really start understanding
that the climate statement, climate reporting.
And I know I've just got something in my email about, um,
submissions on that, which we will be submitting on,
but it, it's, it's not difficult.
It's really simple process.
It gives an ability for government to fill that line between
what the public need to know
and what, um, cabinet needs to know.
Um, and that accountability process
that you're trying to achieve.
You know, that I always talk about governments
department strategies.
Um, once again, it's a c for me,
it's a performance document.
Uh, you need to know what success looks like,
what people are trying to achieve to be able
to make them held accountable.
Um, number six is just my gosh, aren't we,
we are gonna be data overload.
So choosing priorities around data is going
to be fundamentally important.
Like what reports are needed and who's needed.
Um, and there's who needs it.
And this other aspect around
that timely information may not be able
to be accurate understanding.
I mean, that was what really what happened in COVID was the,
the early response was they were operating on very poor
quality information, but some information was
better than no information.
And I think that we, when we are dealing with levels
of disruption, we need to take that onto, onto account.
Um, last
but not least, um, the AI ready documents.
So we are going to see, we've already, you know,
the cybersecurity, what we know about it,
but there's a lot going on that we don't know about it.
We are dealing with, um, bad actors,
bad actor, nation states.
Um, we are dealing in a completely different world than we
had, you know, at the beginning of the century.
So I'm being very strongly arguing that we need
to make AI ready public documents.
Now, this has two aspects.
One is the fact that they need to be searchable in terms
of ai, because if we are going
to use all these different types of AI mechanisms to search
for quality information in the public arena,
you wanna have some control over what those are.
Um, you wanna know, you can trust them
and you wanna know that they're searching the right stuff.
So weirdly, it's not like what we used
to do when we'd do a Google search
or, um, you know, a Word document.
Um, basically
what you're doing now is you're tagging certain information
within documents to be the easy searchable data.
It's, it's relatively complex.
Um, it's something
that we don't want cabinet papers going out being retracted
and looking like cabinet papers,
but they're not cabinet papers.
So we have been arguing that there is a central register
of cabinet papers, um,
and that enables people to, you know,
we can build up the verification of those over time.
So we don't want, for example, um, flawed policy based on,
um, misinformation that's been put into our systems.
So we, we need to, um, think about what,
what public documents are really important
and we need to then put a very strong sort of box
around those and then manage to make sure
that the public are informed well for democracy.
Um, I've got just two, two little slides.
Um, that one's just showing you the nine target areas, so
DPMC sort of owning that.
But we, you know, I'd ask the question is where do you see
that fitting within your terms of reference?
Um, my view is it, um, it is relevant.
Um, I, I kind of wonder whether it should be, um,
fitting more within treasury.
Now, obviously I'm mixed treasury, so a long time ago.
Um, or, uh, so it's just actually understanding
that you've gotta also ringfence, you know,
if treasury's the financial advisor, how does
that fit within this broader frame that you're creating?
And I, if it was me, I would be anything
with a dollar on it, I'd be, you know, definitely trying
to position it under one body.
Um, just because, uh, you know, like for all those reasons
that I've just talked about actually.
Um, and very last is I've just put, um,
which I mentioned the SRB
discussion on public accountability.
We did some work on strategy stewardship, um, looking at,
uh, old forms, looking at Ruth Richardson's, uh, um,
terminology and, and so forth going forward.
There's the GDS index, there's just some links just
to give you some idea of where those things are.
And then I've got the think piece
that we've done on unlocking government documents with ai.
So there we go. Hopefully create enough time. Cameron.
Yeah, no, uh, no, you have thank,
and thank you for those, um, those links.
We put some of us,
particularly like those nine government targets
that are seen on the DPMC website.
But I digress members, have we got any, um,
questions, uh, or comments?
Yep. Um, Wendy, can you, um, flick back
to the government targets?
Yep. So these are the current
government's targets, aren't they?
Yes, they were produced, this is the recorder report,
30th, June, 2025.
Yeah,
I I, I, I've always found those
targets interesting.
And I, um, but to me they're more of a,
a political tool rather than an accountability tool.
Um, and I, I get the, I'm just trying to be fair on this
because I'd like to hoe into the government on it,
but I'm not going to, it's a,
but it's a, um, it is, it's there I guess for
publicity and political purposes.
Um, and if we overemphasize something like this,
um, we end up in the position where we had,
with the previous auditor general who decided that
because we, uh, when we were in government,
we called something a program that
that meant it was a full fledged program that needed
to be treated as an auditable program with very rigid, yeah.
Yeah. So, um, there's, there's this, uh, uh, quite a
and it's a, it's a, it's a point that's come up a number
of times through this inquiry where politics runs into a,
into accountability and there's a attention there.
Um, and, um, I'm just wondering how you can, I, I,
I'd like a comment from you on that. Really.
Yeah, I know. Look, you, you're absolutely spot on.
There is clearly a relationship between the political goals
and objectives and the public service
or the government, um, broader, um, objectives.
And there has to be some sort of bridge
or relationship to them.
Um, it, it can be as simple as, um, you know,
these, these goals are given from ministers
to departments and government to run the government.
I mean, I think, um, if you could, if you could clarify
a definition that gave it, um, substance,
uh, that it is meant to drive
financial activity within the government sector, um,
then I think it absolutely makes sense to actually know what
that success successes.
Um, so for example, even from a political perspective,
if you have, if one political party has objectives
that it's running government with,
and then another one they can actually turn round
and critique it or say, you know, I agree
with this intention, but I don't agree with that intention.
So the problem, I think with, um, these goals
and these terms that have been used, um, it's, uh,
going back to Ruth Richardson and probably beyond
before her, um,
but I'm only aware she, I think she sort
of really started it when she was using the goals to try
and drive financial activity, um,
and delivery of, um, outcomes.
So, you know, you've got this, you have,
you're absolutely right that they are different,
but there's no place that they come together.
And I think it's the management commentary in an annual
report of consolidated government.
And it can, it can be signed by the Minister of Finance,
but there is not a one place you can go to, um,
how many people, for example, go
and look at the December budget update
and, you know, try and, do you know what I mean?
Yeah, I know. I mean, like, you know, I do, but,
but you know, it's actually understanding
that there's no public mechanism
and we really need to care for democracy at a level
that we have never had to before,
because the interference that we're going to see,
and we probably already are seeing is coming
because we are not communicating what that looks like.
So, you know, we are going to go into another election
where those, you know, those purposes of
what the government is being judged against is
not particularly clear.
Um, some of that comes from our MMP, you know,
we've done a lot of work looking at the coalitions, um,
and looking at the goals of the coalitions.
In fact, every, um, we, we've started this process
of looking through the coalition agreements
and we have a working paper and we go through
and say, yes, that one was done
and that one was done, but that one wasn't.
Um, but what's, you know, what's clearly apparent is that
that is seen as a mandate,
and you can kind of understand that too,
because that's an agreement
that being signed by the parties.
But we are actually seeing that the public policy
before the election is different from the public
policy after the election.
And then, and we haven't got a, a proper mechanism
for getting a government view.
And if you don't get government, you can't get performance,
you can't get public accountability.
So we've kind of, like I said,
at the first hurdle falling over.
Okay. We're gonna have to, um, leave it at that.
Uh, Wendy, uh, one, one could also, um, make a point that,
um, that those public service targets, uh, have been, um,
supported by some chief executives.
Uh, any, any hearing that I've been part of, they have said,
whether it's the Secretary of Justice or the Yeah.
Of DPMC, uh, that they help with their work
and their focus of resources.
And so, um, uh, I would argue that they go
beyond their political marketing purposes well beyond.
But anyway, that's a, that's a political
You Don't need to be part of, but thank you. No, no.
One really quick response is yes,
but I don't think the public have got it.
That Would be my comment. Thank
You. Okay. Okay. And
you could also put a link there
to our quarterly, uh,
to the government's quarterly action plans
and quarterly reports is another level
of accountability as well.
Anyway, thank you, Wendy. Thank
You very much. Thank you. Thank you.
Cool. We appreciate that.
And, uh, we are now on to, in our last,
um, 10 minute presentation.
We've got Animal plant, uh,
health Association of New Zealand.
We've got Dr. Liz Shackleton here. Thank you, Dr.
Shackleton. Uh, we look forward to your presentation.
You've got 10 minutes.
Kira Koa, thank you so much, um, to the, um,
group here today for your inquiry
and for the opportunity to chat to you today.
So look, as context, animal
and Plant Health New Zealand, we represent close
to 80 New Zealand and global organizations here, research,
developing, manufacturing and distributing animal
and health pro, um, animal health products.
Why does that actually matter?
These products are the toolkit for many
of New Zealand's goals around sustainability, biosecurity,
conservation, and economic growth.
Our members strongly support your inquiry
and our members re recognize first
and foremost the really crucial role that the system plays
and the importance of robust performance reporting
and public accountability, vital to trust
and confidence, good governance,
and that that also needs to evolve over time.
So look really quickly today, our members have asked for us
to share with you really a bit of a case example
and some key take homes from their experience
of the current system.
And then secondly, looking forward the opportunities
that they see to strengthen that.
Um, so look as context,
our members operate under the AG compounds
and Vet Medicines Act, the hazardous substances
and New Organisms Act and WorkSafe Act,
and essentially that's around approving agricultural
and horticultural products.
Back in February, a Ministry
for Regulation Review was endorsed by cabinet
and it reinforced the critical importance
of this inquiry inquiry
and it confirmed our members' experiences.
So it found a number of themes
directly relevant to this inquiry.
One, it found a lack of strategic direction
and complexity, particularly around monopoly provider,
multi regulator models.
It creates duplication
and importantly, complexity for governance who are trying
to monitor and hold to account.
It also found themes around performance reporting.
Now that really supported our members' experience of metrics
that lack spasticity measurement
of actual impact on the ground.
And that's leading to uncertain processing timeframes
for our members on, um, unclear reporting and outcomes.
And that uncertainty is living out
and impacting us as we speak because some of our r
and d companies are choosing
to exit investment in New Zealand here at a time
when we need it most.
There's also a theme
around uncertain outcomes for investment.
And look, our members really support a properly resource
regulator, but considerable funding increases from industry
in recent years just hasn't delivered improved processing
of applications with water monopoly providers.
In one example, we had a regulator advise industry
after the fact of a multimillion dollar spend
of industry funds on an encore project.
In another example, we had members report
that application fee increases back in 2018, went up
between 60% and 500% for another regulator.
But as of today, that hasn't translated into improved
processing timeframes.
So really I think the mood of our membership is
that they believe it's reasonable for industry
and taxpayers to understand what
outcomes are being delivered for funding.
Um, out of the review that the Ministry
for Regulation have done, they're proposing as what one
of the regulators further levy and cost recovery settings.
Now, for our members, they just cannot justify these
until clear measurable improvements in core business.
Core strategic priorities can be demonstrated.
And for them, that is making transparent, consistent,
and timely decisions on new product approvals.
The last two themes in the review
and our members' experience was around accountability.
Really a theme when we listened to our members
around the quality of performance reporting.
And if that's not there, it is quite a challenge in terms
of obscuring inefficiencies, increases governance risk
and governor's ability to detect
and respond to high risk impacts
and undermines confidence in, um, obviously, um, those
that are within the system.
The review finally had a theme around the importance
of communications and engagement.
It's the quality performance reporting, again,
which builds trust
by actually demonstrating outcomes from the
intentions that are set.
Um, I guess my last piece
before we look forward is
a real enduring question from this review for our members is
that it confirmed an extensive backlog,
but that didn't happen overnight.
The question is what was being reported before this review
and what was being asked by governance?
Because where are we at now?
We're nine months on from a cabinet endorsed review
and with a roadmap for change that's really clear.
Literally yesterday we released a pulse check survey,
which we did to confirm
and substantiate
what was happening on the ground for our members.
Those results confirm
that our members are seeing no meaningful change
in the approval process.
Nine months on from a review.
And in some areas deterioration
and performance, the flow on impacts
for our members are real global RD companies continue
to review their future here
and the longer term impacts for New Zealand
for environmental, economic, social, animal welfare,
productivity, the list goes on.
So all of what our members are seeing directly reflects back
to the issues you've highlighted in your inquiry,
performance reporting, lack of transparency,
and around the weak accountability frameworks
that you've mentioned in your inquiry.
So look, our members' view is forward
and our focus is forward on where are the opportunities
to rebuild that trust and confidence.
And that was a theme identified in the review.
There's really five key things they would like this
inquiry to think about.
It's when you're dealing with complex governance structures,
as is in our case,
have we got really clearly defined accountability roles.
Clear performance indicators is a major priority,
not only aligned with strategic priorities, domestic
and internationally, but the
but performance indicators
that actually capture the whole system reflect outcomes
and what matters to the public and to industry.
Not only what agencies choose to report,
there's a real theme around robust
and specific targets that actually capture the whole process
and the impact on the ground.
Also around funding a really clear theme from our members
around strengthening reporting
around intended versus actual use of funding
and a robust accountability framework
that ensures we've got escalation procedures
and consequences for unmet deliverables.
So I mean, we're continuing to try
and work constructively with regulators through this review.
We've laid out a blueprint
and areas where we're trying to bring up solutions
to support, because as a small country
with finite resource public servants
and these skills, these specialist skill sets are crucial.
So we really welcome opportunities
to make headway with this review.
But we have to be honest
and say that nine months on from a cabinet endorsed review
roadmap, the dial has not moved for our members.
And it's been confirmed in a recent pulse check
that we've done and obviously directly links
to the gaps in your inquiry.
So we thank the committee for the work they're doing.
We really hope it results in performance reporting
and accountability frameworks that aren't just robust,
but they're transparent and they actually hold to account.
So I'll wrap up their respectful of time.
Really appreciate the opportunity to speak on behalf
of our members and look really happy
to answer any questions that you've got.
Oh, thank you Dr. Shekel. And, um, uh, Dr. Wilson,
Uh, Dr. Shekel, thank
you, uh, sobering feedback for us really, uh,
in terms of the state of particularly your sector.
And I'm gathering that your members are,
are quite comfortable
with running their own performance evaluation over their own
activities, uh, and outcomes.
So I guess my question is really to you whether
or not you think there is a better way
that we can include stakeholders such
as yourselves in developing the performance accounting
mechanisms moving forward for, for the sector
and what you are confronting right now in
terms of public outcome?
Yeah. Um, a lot of it starts at governance level.
One of the key opportunities that came out
of this review was the ability
to set up a sector leaders forum.
Now that has been set up and we have just had
after nine months an independent chair appointed,
which is a great opportunity.
And my encouragement
to the committee would be thinking about how you can use
that sector leaders group to maximum impact to inform,
I guess it's the four pillars of governance is what is just,
you cannot go past in this review an element
around strategic priorities, risk, risk, appetite,
risk setting, and then culture.
So how do you find an appropriate forum where
industry governance can inform it would out the real risk
of perceived industry capture or otherwise as well?
'cause that's obviously, um, important
that industry context is not capture,
but it, it does play a vital role.
So it's just thinking about where those forums can be used
to greater effect, both in testing strategic priorities
that are set by agencies, but also the metrics.
Because what we found
notably in our review was often what may be reported,
there could be actually periods of time
or an application's being held.
And unless that's really expressed in the legislation,
often on the ground,
the experience can be different in terms of
how the processes run.
So, uh, think we now at least have a forum in place
that think about where you can use us
to maximum impact. Yep.
Okay. Okay. Thank you Dr. Wilson. And thank you Dr.
Shackleton for your, um, for your submission on behalf
of Animal and Plant Health NZ and, uh, for appearing
before the committee today.
Thank you. Appreciate your time and your work. Thank you.
Thank you. Right. Uh, Mr. Clark,
that's all our hearings today.
There's no one else queued up, is there? No, that's awesome.
Okay. Members, thank you for your, uh, attendance
and your conscientiousness, uh,
and we will see you back in parliament next week.
Thank you so much. Thank you, chair. Thank
You, chair. Thank you, CLA.
Thank
You. Thanks team.